P8105 Homework 2
================

## Problem 1

Import data, clean data, handle missing data, select data, mutate data:

``` r
subway_df = 
  read_csv("NYC_Transit_Subway_Entrance_And_Exit_Data.csv", na = c("NA",".","")) |>
  janitor::clean_names() |>
  select(line:entry, vending, ada) |>
  mutate(
    entry = case_match(
      entry,
      "YES" ~ TRUE,
      "NO" ~ FALSE
    )
  )
```

    ## Rows: 1868 Columns: 32
    ## ── Column specification ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    ## Delimiter: ","
    ## chr (22): Division, Line, Station Name, Route1, Route2, Route3, Route4, Rout...
    ## dbl  (8): Station Latitude, Station Longitude, Route8, Route9, Route10, Rout...
    ## lgl  (2): ADA, Free Crossover
    ## 
    ## ℹ Use `spec()` to retrieve the full column specification for this data.
    ## ℹ Specify the column types or set `show_col_types = FALSE` to quiet this message.

### Description of Dataset:

The NYC Transit Subway dataset contains information about subway station
entrances and exits in New York City. The data has been **imported** and
the column names have been **cleaned** to be in a common standard format
(e.g., through underscores for spaces/lowercase consistency). I
**handled missing values** by converting “NA”, “.”, and empty strings to
NA. I **selected** specific columns/variables that are relevant for
further analysis, including the variables **line** (subway line),
**station_name** (name of the station), **station_latitude** and
**station_longitude** (geographic coordinates of the station), **routes
served** (up to 11 routes per station), entrance_type (type of entrance,
e.g., stair, elevator, etc.), **entry** (whether the entrance allows
entry), **vending** (whether there are vending machines at the
entrance), and **ada** (whether the station is ADA compliant). The entry
variable was converted from a character (“YES”/“NO”) to a logical
variable (TRUE for “YES”, FALSE for “NO”). The resulting dataset has
**1868 rows** and **19 columns**. The data is **not tidy**, considering
there are several columns for each route number, for a total of 11
routes/columns for routes served.

### Questions About Data:

There are **465** distinct stations.

``` r
ada_compliant_stations = subway_df |>
  filter(ada == TRUE) |> 
  distinct(line, station_name) |> 
  nrow()

ada_compliant_stations
```

    ## [1] 84

There are **84** stations that are ADA compliant.

``` r
no_vending_entry = subway_df |>
  filter(vending == "NO", entry == TRUE) |>
  nrow()

no_vending_entry
```

    ## [1] 69

There are 69 station entrances/exits without vending that allow
entrance.

``` r
no_vending = subway_df |>
  filter(vending == "NO")|>
  nrow()

no_vending
```

    ## [1] 183

There are 183 station entrances/exits without vending. **69/183 or
37.70%** of station entrances/exits without vending allow entrance.

### Reformatting Data:

``` r
subway_long_df = 
  subway_df |>
  gather(key = route_number, value = route_name, route1:route11) |>
  separate(route_number, into = c("route_str", "route_number"), sep = 5) |>
  select(-route_str)

distinct_a_train_stations = subway_long_df |>
  filter(route_name == "A") |> 
  distinct(line, station_name) |> 
  nrow()

distinct_a_train_stations
```

    ## [1] 60

**60** distinct stations serve the A train.

``` r
ada_compliant_a_train_stations = subway_long_df |>
  filter(route_name == "A", ada == TRUE) |> 
  distinct(line, station_name) |> 
  nrow()

ada_compliant_a_train_stations
```

    ## [1] 17

**17** of the stations that serve the A train are ADA compliant.

## Problem 2

Read and clean the Mr. Trash Wheel sheet:

``` r
mr_trashwheel_df = 
  read_excel("202309 Trash Wheel Collection Data.xlsx", 
             na = c("NA",".",""), 
             sheet = "Mr. Trash Wheel", 
             range = "A2:N586", 
             col_names = TRUE) |>
  janitor::clean_names() |>
  filter(!is.na(dumpster)) |>
  mutate(
    sports_balls = as.integer(round(sports_balls)), 
    year = as.integer(year),
    trash_wheel = "Mr. Trash Wheel"
    )
```

Read and clean the Professor Trash Wheel sheet & the Gwynnda Trash Wheel
sheet:

``` r
professor_trashwheel_df = 
  read_excel("202309 Trash Wheel Collection Data.xlsx", 
             na = c("NA",".",""), 
             sheet = "Professor Trash Wheel", 
             range = "A2:M108", 
             col_names = TRUE) |>
  janitor::clean_names() |>
  filter(!is.na(dumpster)) |>
  mutate(
    year = as.integer(year),
    trash_wheel = "Professor Trash Wheel"
    )

gwynnda_trashwheel_df = 
  read_excel("202309 Trash Wheel Collection Data.xlsx", 
             na = c("NA",".",""), 
             sheet = "Gwynnda Trash Wheel", 
             range = "A2:L157", 
             col_names = TRUE) |>
  janitor::clean_names() |>
  filter(!is.na(dumpster)) |>
  mutate(
    year = as.integer(year),
    trash_wheel = "Gwynnda Trash Wheel"
    )
```

Combining datasets:

``` r
trashwheel_df = 
  bind_rows(mr_trashwheel_df, professor_trashwheel_df, gwynnda_trashwheel_df) |>
  janitor::clean_names() 
```

### About Combined Data:

I imported 3 datasets that each provided information on a single vessel
(Mr.Trash Wheel, Professor Trash Wheel, or Gwynnda Trash Wheel) that
removes trash. The **variables** included for each vessel/dataset were
dumpster number, month, year, date, weight (tons), volume (cubic yards),
plastic bottles, polystyrene, cigarette buds, glass bottles (not
included in Gwynnda Trash Wheel dataset), plastic bags, wrappers, sports
balls (not included in Professor Trash Wheel dataset or Gwynnda Trash
Wheel dataset) and homes powered. After cleaning, organizing, and
combining the data, the combined dataset contains information from the
three vessels (Mr. Trash Wheel, Professor Trash Wheel, and Gwynnda) with
a total of **845 observations**. The resulting dataset has **845 rows**
and **15 columns**. Each observation represents a specific dumpster
collection event, with key variables including the weight of trash
collected (in tons), the number of plastic bottles collected, or the
number of cigarette butts removed from the water.

Professor Trash Wheel collected a total of **216.26 tons of trash**. In
June 2022, Gwynnda removed **1.812^{4} cigarette butts from the water**.

## Problem 3
